Skyeye Team at MBZIRC 2020: A team of aerial and
                                            ground robots for GPS-denied autonomous fire
                                              extinguishing in an urban building scenario

                                           Simón Martı́nez-Rozas1∗           Rafael Rey1∗        David Alejo1∗         Domingo Acedo1∗
arXiv:2104.01834v2 [cs.RO] 17 May 2021

                                          simon.martinez@uantof.cl           rreyarc@upo.es       daletei@upo.es         dacegom@upo.es

                                          José Antonio Cobano1           Alejandro Rodrı́guez-Ramos2               Pascual Campoy2
                                             jacobsua@upo.es                alejandro.rramos@upm.es               pascual.campoy@upm.es

                                                           Luis Merino1                            Fernando Caballero1
                                                          lmercab@upo.es                             fcaballero@us.es

                                                                         1
                                                                          Service Robotics Laboratory
                                                                           Universidad Pablo de Olavide
                                                                     Crta. Utrera, km. 1, 41013, Sevilla, Spain
                                                                                ∗
                                                                                  Equal contribution

                                                               2
                                                                 Computer Vision and Aerial Robotics Group
                                                                   Centre for Automation and Robotics (C.A.R.)
                                                                 Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM-CSIC)
                                                                Calle Jose Gutierrez Abascal 2, 28006 Madrid, Spain

                                                                                   Abstract

                                             The paper presents a framework for fire extinguishing in an urban scenario by a team of
                                             aerial and ground robots. The system was developed to address Challenge 3 of the 2020
                                             Mohamed Bin Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC). The challenge required
                                             to autonomously detect, locate and extinguish fires on different floors of a building, as
                                             well as in its surroundings. The multi-robot system developed consists of a heterogeneous
                                             robot team of up to three Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) and one Unmanned Ground
                                             Vehicle (UGV). We describe the main hardware and software components for UAV and UGV
                                             platforms and also present the main algorithmic components of the system: a 3D LIDAR-
                                             based mapping and localization module able to work in GPS-denied scenarios; a global
                                             planner and a fast local re-planning system for robot navigation; infrared-based perception
                                             and robot actuation control for fire extinguishing; and a mission executive and coordination
                                             module based on Behavior Trees. The paper finally describes the results obtained during
                                             the competition, where the system worked fully autonomously and scored in all the trials
                                             performed. The presented system ended in 7th position out of 20 teams in the Challenge
                                             3 competition and in 5th position (out of 17 teams) in the Challenge 3 entry to the Grand
                                             Finale (Grand Challenge) of MBZIRC 2020 competition.
1      Introduction

The application of robotic technologies in disaster management and rescue operations is increasing in the
last years due to the advances in the design of platforms and the mapping, localization, perception, planning,
and coordination capabilities (Delmerico et al., 2019). The goal is to decrease the risks that humans face in
such activities and, at the same time, increase the effectiveness of the operations.

Robot competitions are spreading in the world to foster advancements in robotics research for these applica-
tions and to allow proper benchmarking between different approaches. Some examples related to search and
rescue and disaster management scenarios are: the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Robotics Challenge (Pratt and Manzo, 2013), RoboCup Rescue competition (Sheh et al., 2016), euRathlon
and ERL Emergency (Winfield et al., 2017), DARPA Fast Lightweight Autonomy program (Mohta et al.,
2018), Trinity College Robot Competition Schedule Changes (TrinityCollege, 2020) and the Mohamed Bin
Zayed International Robotics Challenge (MBZIRC) (MBZIRC, 2020).

Among these missions and challenges, firefighting is seen as a relevant application of robot systems given the
dangerous conditions in which firefighters have to operate. Firefighters are at a constant risk of being burned,
becoming trapped, or inhaling smoke. The risks of losing human lives could be greatly reduced by using
autonomous robots capable of searching, detecting and extinguishing fires (Chen et al., 2019). In general,
current automatic firefighting systems are fixed. For instance, automatic fire sprinklers and alarms are used
in heavily populated and hazardous areas for rapidly extinguishing any fire. Mobile robotic firefighting
systems such as ground and aerial robots, on the other hand, could travel into unsafe and/or inaccessible
areas to collect information through onboard sensors (visual and infrared cameras, LIDAR, etc) (Pecho
et al., 2019) and even to perform extinguishing operations (Innocente and Grasso, 2019). This would offer
critical new capabilities on real-time situation awareness and remote extinguishing to firefighters. Achieving
this vision still requires, though, advancing the state of the art and robustness of current robots both in
software and hardware, as well as in different directions (Delmerico et al., 2019), as performance in both
indoors and outdoors spaces, clear fire image detection (Aydin et al., 2019) and capability of autonomous
navigation(Imdoukh et al., 2017).

In this regard, the MBZIRC 2020 competition included a Challenge 3 denoted: “Team of Robots to Fight Fire
in High Rise Building”. In it, a team of robots needed to collaborate to detect, localize and extinguish fires
in a simulated high-rise building. This involved putting out fires located inside and on the walls of a building
at different heights and floors, and outside the building, by using water and fire blankets. The mission is
challenging and requires to broaden the state-of-the-art in several areas: deployment and coordination of
multiple heterogeneous robots (UAVs and UGV) in the same urban workspace; autonomous indoor/outdoor
navigation in cluttered environments; autonomous search and location of fires; hardware adaptations and
control for fire extinguishing.

This paper describes in detail a multi-robot fully autonomous system conceived for fire extinguishing in such
urban high rise building firefighting scenario. The system is composed of three Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
(UAV) and one Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV). The system ended in 7th position out of 20 teams in
the Challenge 3 competition of MBZIRC 2020, and in 5th position (out of 17 teams) in the Challenge 3
entry to the Grand Finale (Grand Challenge), in which this Challenge 3 and the other two Challenges of the
competition were run simultaneously1 .

The main contributions of the paper are related directly to the technical advances required to address
MBZIRC Challenge 3 by a fleet of heterogeneous robot in fully autonomous mode. First of all, a multi-
modal robust localization module, able to operate in GPS-denied scenarios. While the competition allowed
the use of GPS and even DGPS (with a penalization in this latter case), the ability to operate without
GPS was crucial to navigate autonomously and score in all trials, given the intermittent reception due to
satellite occlusion and other factors. Secondly, a flexible mission composition and execution system based
    1 https://www.mbzirc.com/winning-teams/2020
on Behaviour Trees (BT) (Colledanchise and Ogren, 2017) in charge of combining all modules to define the
behaviors of each robot and that of the whole team to accomplish missions. The versatility of BTs was
fundamental to quickly adapt to the conditions of the competition. Finally, the paper also contributes to
the robotics community with the description of the specialized navigation, control and perception modules,
and hardware employed in the competition.

The paper is organized into eight sections. Section 2 describes the hardware designs for the UAV and UGV
platforms. Section 3 presents the mapping and localization system implemented. The autonomous navigation
system of each platform is described in Section 4. Section 5 shows the approach proposed to detect and
extinguish the fires and Section 6 presents the framework used to carry out the mission. Experiments are
presented in Section 7. Finally, lessons learned and conclusions are described in Section 8.

1.1   State of the art

The idea of using robots for fire fighting has been present in the community for many years. Early designs can
be traced back to (Bradshaw, 1991), which describes the functional and mechanical design of a ground robot
for fire detection and first intervention in indoor environments. In (Amano et al., 2001), the authors show the
design of a climbing robot for helping fire activities in buildings. All in all, robots are considered a promising
tool to fight fires because of their ability to reach inaccessible zones, assist in dangerous environments, and
to carry sensors to monitor and control the fires.

Actually, robotic technology is being often deployed as part of firefighting operations in the last years.
Current examples can be found in the Notre Dame fire in 2019 with the firefighting ground robot called
Collosus2 . It is a remote-controlled firefighting automaton designed and built by Shark Robotics. TC800-FF
is another remotely operated ground robot with some autonomous navigation capabilities designed to assist
fire-fighter during operations3 . Two of the most popular firefighting ground robots are the Thermite RS1-T3
and RS2-T24 . The aim of all these robots is to replace fighters and to keep them safe and free from the heavy
work that distracts them and takes time away from solving problems quickly and effectively. Most of these
systems are mainly teleoperated. While teleoperation can be enough for certain scenarios, the inclusion of
autonomous capabilities expands further the utility of such systems, and can be very relevant when fleets of
several robots are involved, like in the MBZIRC challenge.

Furthermore, in the case of high-rise buildings and in other scenarios, the use of aerial robots can be beneficial.
In the last 15 years, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been more and more used in wildfire fighting
(e.g. (Ambrosia et al., 2003; Casbeer et al., 2006; Merino et al., 2006; Skeele and Hollinger, 2016; Bailon-
Ruiz et al., 2018)). These systems are mainly used as “eyes in the skies”, to provide situational awareness
to first response teams, given their capability of carrying sensors and position in vantage points. Some of
these works (Casbeer et al., 2006; Merino et al., 2006; Bailon-Ruiz et al., 2018) have shown the advantages
of using teams of cooperating UAVs for fire fighting. In particular, we have also shown in our former works
(Merino et al., 2006; Merino et al., 2012) the added value of cooperating heterogeneous UAVs with different
capabilities and that can carry complementary sensors in order to localize precisely fire spots and discard
false alarms. Currently, drones are used as part of wildfire operations, as for instance during the Australian
bushfires where drones were used to search and rescue koalas affected by the fires (Witt et al., 2020).

Those works do not consider the inclusion of fire suppression mechanisms, which for UAVs is also a challenge.
A novel hose type robot, which can fly directly into the fire source via a water-jet, has been proposed in
(Ando et al., 2018). In (Yamada and Nakamura, 2016) the concept of attaching a drone to the tip of a
fire hose and remotely extinguishing a fire is presented. These studies have not been tested in a real fire
extinguishing task. Problems such as the payload and influence of the tension of the hose itself on the flight
must be addressed to bring the UAV’s hose closer to the fire source.
  2 https://www.shark-robotics.com/colossus
  3 https://www.robotpompier.com/en/
  4 http://www.roboticfirefighters.com/
Figure 1: Arena of Challenge 3. There are simulated fires on the facades of the building (top-left), and inside
the building (down, right), located on the ground, first and second floor (to be suppressed with water). There
are also fires located on the ground outside (down, left) that need to be suppressed with a blanket.

When considering the use of autonomous robots to fight urban fires in buildings as in MBZIRC, additional
challenges are present, like the navigation in cluttered and GPS-denied environments or with limited GPS
coverage, as is typically the case in urban canyons and/or close to and inside buildings, and the operation
in low-visibility conditions (Schneider and Wildermuth, 2017). The last years have seen important advances
in the navigation of UAVs in GPS-denied scenarios (for instance (Shen et al., 2014; Mohta et al., 2018;
Perez-Grau et al., 2018; Usenko et al., 2020)). However, there are still issues that need to be addressed to
navigate and precisely position the UAVs to attack fires in urban scenarios like the one posed by Challenge
3 of MBZIRC.

The cooperation between UAVs and UGVs presents additional challenges. In (Michael et al., 2014) the
synergies between a UGV and UAVs are exploited to map buildings affected by earthquakes. But there are not
many works in the literature that consider fully-autonomous ground and aerial robots for fire fighting in urban
environments. In (Maza et al., 2011), a system of multiple UAVs cooperating with a static sensor network
for a fire scenario in a building is presented. UAVs are used to deploy new sensors and provide situation
awareness, which is then used to attack the fire by firefighters. The work shows again how cooperation can
be very valuable. However, the system assumes GPS coverage, no ground robots are considered, and no
extinguishing is performed by the robots themselves.

In sum, addressing a fire extinguishing scenario in a high-rise building by a team of robots, as the one posed
by MBZIRC, still requires advances in localization, navigation, perception, and mission coordination and
execution of the system as a whole. The paper presents in the next sections the proposed advances in those
lines, discussing further literature pertinent for each case.

1.2   Problem statement

This section summarizes the main aspects of the rules, conditions, and scoring of the MBZIRC Challenge 3.
The challenge requires a team of UAVs (maximum three) and UGV (maximum one) collaborating in order
to autonomously extinguish a series of simulated fires in an urban high rise building firefighting scenario5 .
Figure 1 shows the arena for Challenge 3, with a size of approximately that of half a football pitch. A
15-meter high structure simulates the building.

The robots have to extinguish a set of 6 fires located in the 3 floors of the building using water. For each
  5 https://www.mbzirc.com/challenge/2020
Figure 2: The ground platform used for Challenge 3.(a) Showing performance in the scenario of MBZIRC
(b) Deploy of onboard sensors and Water Extinguishing System

floor, there is one fire inside the building and one fire on the facade (see Fig. 1). Furthermore, there are 2
fires located outside the building at ground level that must be extinguished using fire blankets carried by
the robots. The locations of the fires are changed randomly between trials.

Each fire is scored between 0 and 1. For the fires in the building the maximum score is obtained if the
amount of water properly thrown into the fire is 1 liter. Simulated fire spots on the ground score when they
are covered with a blanket (with a maximum when they are totally covered). The final score is obtained by
a weighted sum for all 8 fires. Different fires receive different weights according to their difficulty6 .

The mission can be attempted in either fully autonomous or manual mode. The mission is considered in
manual mode from the moment there is an intervention by a human (the only interventions allowed are to
replenish water and change batteries and blankets). Any score in manual mode is considered below a score
in autonomous mode, or to disambiguate in case of a draw for scores in autonomous mode. GPS is allowed.
RTK/DGPS can be used although a penalty of 25% will be applied if it is used. The duration of Challenge
3 is 15 minutes, with a 5-minute preparation slot.

2      Hardware

The robot team to address the challenge consists of one UGV and and up to 3 UAVs. They are adequately
equipped to perform navigation and to detect and extinguish the fire for this firefighting scenario.

2.1    Unmanned ground vehicle

The ground platform used is called SIAR (Alejo et al., 2020), a 6-wheeled robot with independent traction
system and a pan&tilt mechanism on top. The robot is able to navigate at a maximum speed of 0.7 m/s
and it has battery autonomy for more than 4 hours of operation (motion and sensing/computation). The
robot integrates an i7 computer, local sensing and a 3D LIDAR. The main sensors and mechanisms used in
the ground platform are (see Fig. 2):

       • GPS sensor UBlox 8 and ArduIMUv3 Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU).
       • LIDARs: A 3D OS-1-16 LIDAR manufactured by Ouster has been installed on top of the robot. The
         LIDAR is able to provide 320k 3D points per second, ranging from 0.2 to 120 meters. The information
    6 https://www.mbzirc.com/scoring-scheme
Figure 3: (a) Adapted DJI Matrice 210v2 for facade fire extinguishing, with LIDAR and PC placed to avoid
blocking the down-looking sensors. (b) Adapted DJI Matrice 600 for blanket deployment and facade fire
extinguishing.

        gathered by this sensor is used for localization and mapping. Furthermore, a Hokuyo UTM-30LX
        2D sensor is installed. The information of this sensor is used for local obstacle detection/avoidance.

      • Cameras: A SeekThermal IR camera to detect the sources of heat and an Orbbec’s ASTRA camera
        that provides the operator with images to operate the platform if needed.

      • Pan&Tilt unit: It moves the thermal camera for searching and centering the fire, and at the same
        time, it holds and guides the hose of the extinguishing system to aim the fire.

      • Extinguishing System: It consists in a series connection of two water pumps (5V, 4.8 W, 300cm
        Hmax, 300L/H, no valve), one MOSFET module 5V, hoses, and a 3-liter water tank (within the
        limits of the competition). To improve the intake of water, the tank is placed above the water
        pumps. Alike, the output hose is placed above the pump to prevent the water from going out, as
        the pumps do not have a valve. With this, we have a system that ejects water 2 meters in a straight
        line from the hose outlet

2.2   Unmanned aerial vehicles

Regarding to the aerial platforms, the models used for the competition are adaptations of the DJI Matrice
210 V2 and the DJI Matrice 600 Pro (see Fig. 3). We selected these platforms because of the robustness
of the hardware and software, support that the provider offers, and also their facility to communicate the
PC on-board with the Robot Operating System (ROS) (Quigley et al., 2009). The drone’s structure was
adapted in order to perform the tasks and to integrate new hardware. For that, we take into account the
maximum weight that can carry each drone and also the dimension constraints of the competition. Each
UAV robot integrates an i7 NUC computer and local sensing. The main sensors and mechanisms added to
the UAVs are (see Fig. 3):

      • DJI Matrice onboard sensors. This includes single GPS, Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and
        barometric altimeter. DJI Matrice 600 intergrates 3 GPS receivers and 3 IMUs for redundancy and
        fault detection purposes, but they behave as single devices.

      • 3D LIDAR. OS-1-16 LIDAR by Ouster. The purpose of this sensor is threefold: environment
        mapping, localization, and odometry. It is the basis for the generation of the 3D map of the
        environment, and to compute an accurate robot odometry for the UAVs. It is also used as main
        sensor for robot localization in all robots, and to detect obstacles by the navigation module.
      • Infrared camera: SeekThermal whose images are used for fire detection. The M210 carries one
        camera looking forward, while the M600 carries an additional one in a nadir configuration for the
        ground fires.
      • Water Extinguishing System: we use the same pumps as the UGV platform, but with less capacity
        due to payload constraints. We use two 0.5-liter water tank, which are positioned on each leg of
        the drone to evenly distribute their weight . The outlet of the tanks are joined in a coupling that
        carries the water to the pumps. These are located in a structure below the drone and the tanks.
        An aluminum tube is used to guide the outlet hose from the pumps to a safe area in which the
        air turbulence generated by the drone itself does not disperse the water when it is ejected. A flow
        restrictor is placed at the outlet of the hose to increase the pressure and range.
      • Blanket Extinguishing system (M600 only): we use six electromagnets to carry and drop the blanket.
        The electromagnets are located on a bar that joins the back of the two legs of the drone. The blanket
        is transported rolled up to prevent the air turbulence generated by the drone from producing a sail
        effect. The electromagnets are distributed into two groups of three electromagnets each. In each
        group, there is one electromagnet for rolling the blanket and two for dropping it. When desired, the
        rolling electromagnets are deactivated and the blanket is unrolled, and when the blanket is to be
        thrown, the drop electromagnets are deactivated.

3     3D Mapping and Localization

The application considered requires that the robots are localized seamlessly and accurately both in GPS
and GPS-denied environments (including buildings interiors, urban canyons and, in general, areas with high
dilution of precision), with a smooth transition among them. Our solution considers a map-based localization
system able to fuse data from different sensors.

The mapping and localization system proposed consists of two main components: a LIDAR-based odometry
and mapping and an online map-based global localization module. These systems create the global map
during the mapping phase, and estimate the global position of the robot into the map during the mission
respectively. While there are differences in the implementations for the UAVs and UGV, the modules are
based on the same principles.

3.1   3D Mapping and multi-sensor odometry

Different approaches can be used for 3D mapping and odometry in aerial vehicles. Stereo cameras (Kitt
et al., 2010; Geiger et al., 2011; Schmid et al., 2013) and RGBD (Endres et al., 2012; Kerl et al., 2013)
are common choices indoors or for outdoor navigation close to obstacles. However RGBD and time-of-flight
cameras cannot work under strong sunlight, and stereo cameras would need a large baseline in order to
accurately estimate distances at 25 meters approximately (as the case of Challenge 3). Bundle adjustment
approaches (Cucci et al., 2017; Pagliari et al., 2015) can be used offline in combination to visual cameras
or short-baseline stereo to build accurate maps outdoors, but they cannot provide reliable odometry during
the robot operation. On the other hand, 3D-LIDAR approaches work outdoors, range up to 120 meters and
can perceive the 360º of the robot’s environment.

Thus, the base for the proposed mapping and localization systems is a LIDAR-based odometry system that
allows to estimate the relative motion of the robot. This module considers IMU and 3D LIDAR measurements
in order to compute a reliable 6DoF robot odometry in the environment. It provides short-term aligned scans
that can be used for local mapping, and a map of the environment. It integrates the IMU estimation together
with a LIDAR-based mapping process to provide global consistency to the mapping process.

The LIDAR-based odometry module makes use of the LIDAR Odometry and Mapping (LOAM) system
(Zhang and Singh, 2014; Zhang and Singh, 2017), which decomposes the original SLAM problem into scan
Figure 4: Two views of the map generated for the Challenge 3 of the scenario shown in Fig. 1 with data
provided by the M600 UAV. (a) a map perspective in 3D space and (b) the top view of the map.

registration and mapping. The system computes high-precision motion estimates and maps. We make use
of an open software implementation of the original LOAM system 7 .

A drone equipped with LIDAR, GPS and on-board sensors (IMU, altimeter, etc) was flown manually over
the Challenge 3 arena , mapping the environment at different altitudes, from 2 meters to the building top.
The resulting 3D map is shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen how the system is able to accurately map the
interior of the building and also the four scaffolding structures in the corners. Originally, the map also
included the surrounding buildings, but they were removed to reduce the size of the map because these
areas were unreachable by the robots. During the mapping stage, the information from the GPS is used to
compute the relative transformation between the map-based global frame and the GPS coordinate system
for multi-sensor localization.

3.2   Multi-sensor robot localization

The localization module provides a robust global position of the robot within the map built in Section 3.1.
Map-based approaches for localization are usually better than SLAM approaches in terms of reliability and
computational requirements. Thus, decoupling the robot localization from the map building process saves
computation resources because the map is built offline once, and the complexity of the algorithm is usually
smaller with the corresponding impact in reliability.

One of the approaches based on predefined models of the environment is commonly known as teach-replay
(Gridseth and Barfoot, 2019; Royer et al., 2007), which is accomplished in two stages: first the robot is
manually piloted along the desired path as in a teaching phase, and an accurate 3D map of the environment
is built, along with the robot motion from this learning path; afterwards, this map is used to locate the robot
when it repeatedly visits the same path. Although very effective, these approaches are not general enough
since they only enables a robot to follow a predetermined trajectory.

Monte Carlo Localization (MCL) is another approach that makes use of a known map of the environment,
and is commonly used for robot navigation in indoor environments (Thrun et al., 2001). It is a probabilistic
localization algorithm that makes use of a particle filter to estimate the pose of the robot within the map,
based on sensor measurements. An extension of this approach for 6D localization based on 2D laser scanner
is presented in (Hornung et al., 2010), but it is meant for the 2D motion of humanoid robots in a 3D
environment, which makes it not suitable for aerial robots. The use of GPUs can enhance the computing
capabilities of the on-board system regarding MCL-based approaches, as proposed by other authors (Kanai
  7 https://github.com/HKUST-Aerial-Robotics/A-LOAM
et al., 2015; Fallon et al., 2012).

The approach used in this paper is based on Monte Carlo localization. It extends our previous work presented
in (Perez-Grau et al., 2017b) with the following aspects:

       • The particle prediction model has been adapted to absorb non-modelled errors in the odometric
         system. One of the major issues of MCL approaches are their dependence on the odometric model.
         A faulty odometry quickly leads to filter divergence due to a wrong dispersion of the particles into
         the solution space. We included new random terms into the particle prediction model in order to
         account for these non-modelled errors.

       • New sensor updates: Compass, altimeter and GPS were integrated into the localization approach in
         order to build a multi-sensor approach with increased reliability. The MBZIRC competition requires
         that the robots are localized seamlessly and accurately both in GPS and GPS-denied environments,
         with a smooth transition among them. Integrating multiple sensors improves the reliability of the
         solution, reducing the dependence on a single sensor and also easy the transition from GPS-denied
         to full-GPS navigation.

       • General improvements for faster and robust execution. The localization system is an essential
         element of the robot navigation, it is involved in almost every robot task, so it must be robust, and
         efficient because robot on-board computation is very limited.

The source code of the version used in the experiments is publicly available8 .

The localization filter maintains N pose hypotheses (particles) defined as pti = [xti , yit , zit , Ψti ], where xti , yit , zit
and Ψti refers to the robot position and yaw angle for particle i at time t. Each particle has an associated
weight wit such as ΣN    t
                     i (wi ) = 1. Note how the robot roll and pitch angles are not included into the robot pose
definition. These angles are available and accurate enough in the robot through the use of its onboard IMU.
They are fully observable and their values are usually accurate. This greatly reduces the computational
complexity of the algorithm, allowing for real-time onboard computation.

The particles are initialized by setting the initial pose (at the take-off spot) and distributing them in the
hypotheses space. The LIDAR-based odometry described in Section 3.1 provides increments of the robot pose
on the robot frame (after roll and pitch compensation) [∆xt , ∆y t , ∆z t , ∆Ψt ], which are used to propagate
the distribution of the particles at each time step. Thus, the state of the particles will evolve according to
the following expressions for particle pti = [xti , yit , zit , Ψti ]:

                                  xt+1
                                   i      = xti + Nx + ∆xt · cos(Ψti ) − ∆y t · sin(Ψti )
                                 yit+1    = yit + Ny + ∆xt · sin(Ψti ) + ∆y t · cos(Ψti )
                                 zit+1    = zit + Nz + ∆z t                                                                 (1)
                                 Ψt+1
                                   i      =    Ψti + NΨ + ∆Ψt

The values of ∆xt , ∆y t , ∆z t , and ∆Ψt are drawn randomly following a normal distribution centered in
their actual values and standard deviations proportional to each increment itself. The values of Nx , Ny , Nz
and NΨ are design parameters, they are also drawn randomly from a zero-centered normal distribution with
fixed standard deviation. The main purpose of these parameters are to account for ourliers int the odometry
estimation. They force to randomly sample solutions not included into the odometry estimation in view of
   8 https://github.com/robotics-upo/mcl3d
possible errors. This random noise increases the robustness of the solution by exploring particle states near
the odometry prior.

The approach evaluates the sensors only when the robot moves above given thresholds in both translation
and rotation. When the robot moves above one or both thresholds, it performs an update: using the
previous equations to predict robot position according to odometry, updating particles based on sensors
and re-sampling the hypotheses space when required. The following sensor readings are used to update the
weight wit associated to each particle’s hypothesis pti : the point clouds provided by the 3D LIDAR sensor,
the 3D position provided by the GPS, the robot roll, pitch and yaw provided by the IMU and the height
above the ground provided by the altitude sensor. Each sensor is integrated into the MCL as follows (for
the sake of clarity, the time index t is removed from the following equations):

      • The point clouds are transformed to each particle pose in order to find correspondences between
        the cloud and what the map should look like from that particle’s pose. Since this is very expensive
        computationally, a 3D probability grid is computed offline as in (Hornung et al., 2010; Perez-Grau
        et al., 2017a). Instead of storing binary information about occupancy in the map, this grid stores
        a value of how likely is that a given position falls within an occupied point of the map. Thus, the
        probability of each cell c = [xc , yc , zc ] is computed as a Gaussian distribution centered in the closest
        occupied point in the map m = [xm , ym , zm ], and whose variance σ 2 depends on the sensor noise
        used in the approach.

                                                            1                   2     2
                                            grid(c) = √             e−||c−m|| /2σ                               (2)
                                                            2πσ 2
        Such probability grid only needs to be computed once, it is not required to be updated for a
        given environment, and relieves from performing numerous distance computations between each
        cloud point for each particle and its closest occupied point in the map. Besides, each point cloud
        is first transformed according to the current roll and pitch provided by the on-board IMU. This
        transformation is done just once per update, reducing the computational requirements as well. Then,
        for every point of the transformed cloud, we access its corresponding value in the 3D probability
        grid. Such value would be an indicator of how likely is that point to be part of the map. By doing
        this with every point of the cloud and adding all the probability values, we obtain a figure of how
        well that particle fits the true location of the aerial robot according to the map.
        Finally, the weight wimap of each particle pi is computed. Assuming that the point cloud is composed
        of M 3D points vj , the weight is computed by adding the associated probability grid values:

                                                             M
                                                        1 X
                                              wimap =         grid(pi (vj ))                                    (3)
                                                        M j=1

        where pi (vj ) stands for the transformation of the point vj to the particle’s state pi , and grid(pi (vj ))
        is the evaluation of the probability grid in such transformed position.
        Equation (3) can be also computed as the product of all grid(pi (vj )). However this was discarded for
        the following reasons: a) outlier points vj might have a significant impact in the weight computation,
        leading to almost zero in some cases, b) point clouds area easily composed by dozens of thousands of
        points, given that grid(pi (vj )) ranges from 1 to 0, we can fall into numerical errors in the product.

      • The position measurements provided by the GPS are used to check how well each particle matches
        the sensor reading. First, the GPS position is transformed into the map by means of a known
        fixed transformation computed during mapping task. Then, a wgps is computed for each particle.
        Assuming a GPS measurement pgps , the associated weight wigps is is computed as follows:

                                                        1                gps
                                                                               ||2 /2σ 2
                                            wigps = √           e−||pi −p                                       (4)
                                                        2πσ 2
        where the distance computation dismisses the altitude contribution of the GPS, which is subject
        to significant noise. Also, the standard deviation of the GPS measurement σ is computed empir-
        ically from the data gathered during the mapping stage and to account for GPS errors in single
        configuration.

      • The height above the ground is integrated into the MCL through the re-sampling stage. Instead
        of including the information as a regular update, we decided to include this information into the
        re-sampling, forcing the hypotheses to be distributed around the altitude provided by the robot
        altimeter. This way, we can reduce the dispersion of the particles around Z axis, which is easily
        observable by means of sensors such as laser altimeter, barometer or GPS.

      • IMU yaw angle is also integrated through the re-sampling stage. The rationale behind this decision
        is also based on the computational optimization and the nature of the yaw angle. In the experiments
        area, the yaw angle was checked to be only slightly distorted by the environment, so that we can
        trust the estimation from the magnetometer. Thus, every time a new re-sampling is performed, the
        orientation of the particles are drawn from a Gaussian distribution centered in the latest yaw value
        provided by the IMU. A global to map calibration is used to transform the IMU yaw into the map
        yaw.

As mentioned, GPS and point-cloud updates are integrated into the filter. Given the distinct nature of the
two technologies involved, we calculate separate weights for each sensing modality. A weighted average is
used to obtain the final weight of each particle:

                                           wi = α ∗ wimap + (1 − α) ∗ wigps                              (5)

where α is chosen depending on the particularities of the indoor environment where the robot is going to
operate. If the map used in the MCL does not contain the full environment or its accuracy is not enough
to trust the map matching, α should be lower than 0.5. Whereas if GPS measurements are not accurate, α
should be higher.

This approach is used for both robot systems, ground and aerial. However, the dispersion in Z axis is set
to a very small value in the predictive model of the ground robot. This relates with the fact that the UGV
moves in 2D.

3.3   Experiments

A set of experiments have been conceived in order to validate and benchmark the presented approach.
Thus, we first compared the estimation errors of our approach with respect to MCL3D (Perez-Grau et al.,
2017b). The software implementation and datasets publicly available here9 have been used to benchmark
our approach. The dataset provides the LIDAR data gathered by an aerial robot flying indoors in a 20x20x5
meters volume. The dataset also provides the ground-truth robot position computed with a motion tracking
system with millimetric accuracy.

Figure 5 shows the resulted robot position and orientation estimations, and also the computed errors with
respect to the ground-truth. In this experiment only LIDAR information and the environment map was used,
no other sensor were used. Both algorithms have been setup with the same general parameters and make use
of 1000 particles. The LIDAR odometry presented in Section 3.1 was used to compute the robot odometry.
It can be seen how the errors in position are approximately the same in both approaches. Both approaches
follow the ground truth position with small errors in X and Y, while most of the errors are introduced in
the Z estimation. On the other hand, the errors in the yaw estimation are clearly smaller in our approach,
  9 https://github.com/fada-catec/amcl3d
Figure 5: Robot localization estimation and errors. The red line stands for the MCL3D estimation, the
green line denotes the estimation of our method and blue line stands for the ground-truth robot position
and orientation (Left) Estimated robot position in X, Y, Z and Yaw angle. (Right) Computed instant error
in position (meters) and yaw angle (radians) with respect to the ground-truth. Dashed lines shows the
corresponding RMSE error.

the RMSE error is roughly a 40% smaller. This improvement mostly comes from the new particle prediction
model presented in (1). The possibility to introduce small prediction noise in the particle’s evolution helps
to model small inaccuracies coming for the odometric system.

As previously commented, the errors in Z and yaw use to be predominant in our approach. This is related
with the fact the 3D LIDAR mounted in the aerial robot mostly perceives the walls and structures, but not
the floor. On the other hand, the yaw angle is also prone to drift due to error accumulation in the odometry.
Section 3.2 proposes the integration of the localization approach with other sensors such as compass, GPS
and altimeter to reduce the increase the accuracy and robustness of the system. Thus, Table 1 presents
the computed RMSE error in the estimated robot’s position and orientation for different combinations of
sensors.

                             Approach                 RMSE (m)      RMSE (rad)
                             MCL3D                     0.2729         0.0517
                             Ours                      0.3226         0.0292
                             Ours+Alt                  0.2736         0.0245
                             Ours+Yaw                  0.2555         0.0015
                             Ours+Alt+Yaw              0.2167         0.0016
                             Ours+Gps                  0.3428         0.0302
                             Ours+Gps+Alt              0.2777         0.0241
                             Ours+Gps+Alt+Yaw          0.2205         0.0016
                             Ours+Gps+Yaw              0.2540         0.0016

                  Table 1: Estimated RMSE localization error of the proposed approach

The sensors used in Table 1 have been simulated based on the ground truth. Given the truth position,
altitude and yaw angle, noisy readings of each sensor have been computed. We injected Gaussian errors
in the simulated measurements in order to mimic the behaviour of a real sensor. It can be seen how the
introduction of the yaw angle has a significant impact in the general estimation, not only in robot yaw (which
is is obvious) but also in position, as can be seen in the implementation using yaw. On the other hand, the
altimeter also benefits the robot position estimation. However, GPS does not provide a clear improvement
in the estimation. This is probably produced by the relatively high sensor noise (0.5 m in X and Y position),
which is in the order of the errors computed based in the map/point-cloud matching. However, having
alternative estimation of robot position is beneficial from the point of view of redundancy, reason why we
performed experiments also with GPS integration.
Figure 6: DJI M600 X-Y localization at the MBZIRC arena during execution of Trials 1 and 2. (a) Estimated
XY position in Trial 1. (b) Estimated XY position in Trial 2. Red line denotes the MCL estimation and
blue line denotes the GPS estimation.

The proposed approach integrating compass, altimeter and GPS was used and tested in experiments involving
real robot operations during the MBZIRC trials. Figure 6 shows the estimated localization of our DJI M600
during two experiments in the MBZIRC arena. The figure also shows the estimated GPS position of the DJI
M600 during the experiments (blue line in the graph). We can see GPS estimation issues in both experiments.
Thus, in Fig. 6-b it can be seen how from second 175 to 625 approximately, the GPS estimation evolves at
constant velocity in Y axis, with a 15 meters jump in Y at second 625. During this period the drone was
landed so the robot position must stay approximately constant.

Figure 6-a also shows constant velocity integration in axis Y from second 225 to 475 approximately. As
previously noted, the GPS eventually recovers the right estimation, converging to the MCL estimation,
which stay stable during the whole experiment.

These GPS errors presented in Fig. 6 were common during the MBZIRC 2020 execution. This behaviour
was detected during the rehearsal days, and we finally decided to set the value of wgps from (5) to 0 to avoid
integrating outliers into the estimation, leading to a complete GPS-free localization approach.

4     Autonomous robot navigation

The challenge requires the robots to reach arbitrary free poses in the map (outside and inside the building)
to look for fires and to attack them once detected. A two-stage autonomous navigation system (global and
local planners) has been implemented in order to deal with this environment. The Global Planner computes
a global path on the map frame. The inputs are the goal to be reached, the static global map of the
environment and the current robot localization given by the localization approach described in the previous
section. The output is a feasible and safe path that should be followed in order to reach the goal. The
Local Planner is in charge of following the global path and dealing with dynamic and unmapped obstacles
detected by the onboard 3D LIDAR. It takes as input the global path and a local map built by using the
measurements of the onboard sensors. As output, it provides a free-collision local trajectory to the path
tracker module. In the following, we describe the main techniques for each module.

4.1   Path planning
The application considered does not require precise dynamic motion planning for the vehicle. The main
consideration is to provide safe paths within the workspace, handling the vehicle dynamics in the path
tracker. At the same time, we need fast planning capabilities, as in the case of the local planner a new local
plan should be generated whenever a new LIDAR measure is obtained (and therefore a new local map is
generated), at an approximate rate of 10Hz.

Different types of approaches for tackling 3D path planning have been proposed in the literature: discrete
search optimal algorithms, sampling-based algorithms and bioinspired algorithms. Related to the first type,
the A* algorithm has been used in several works (Filippis et al., 2012; Sanchez-Lopez et al., 2019; Zhan et al.,
2014). Another algorithm is the Lazy Theta* algorithm, which is based on the A* algorithm (Nash and
Tovey, 2010). The Lazy Theta* algorithm, an any-angle find-path algorithm, computes shorter paths than
the A* algorithm because it does not constrain paths to be formed by graph edges (to find short “any-angle”
paths). Sampling-based algorithms such as RRT (Rapidly exploring Random Tree) have also been used in
path planning (Lin and Saripalli, 2017). An comparison between A* algorithm and RRT algorithm is done
in (Zammit and van Kampen, 2020), both algorithms can be applied in real–time. The advantage of the
graph-based algorithms with respect to sampling-based algorithms is that the computed path is closer to the
shortest path, and the solution is deterministic. Bioinspired approaches imitate the behavior of humans or
other animals, it is worth to mention Particle Swam Optimization (PSO) (Alejo et al., 2014), and also genetic
algorithms (Conde et al., 2012). These algorithms generally require significant computational resources, and
their performance may vary depending on the scenario considered. Considering the Challenge 3, we need
to implement a safe and precise waypoint navigation system which rapidly plan paths. The Lazy Theta*
algorithm presents the most suitable characteristics and is chosen with respect to other planning algorithms
due to its computational load and its high repeteability.

Thus, the path planners are based on the Lazy Theta* algorithm (Nash and Tovey, 2010), a fast and reliable
heuristic planner. However, we have modified the original Lazy Theta* algorithm to foster safety while still
maintaining its good computation time. Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code of the original algorithm and
highlights the two modifications implemented (in red).

These two modifications of the Lazy Theta* algorithm have the following effects:

      • Cost to reach a node. We added a cost component to the Euclidean distance in the original
        algorithm (see lines 33 and 35 of the Algorithm 1). For each node in the grid, this cost is the
        distance to the nearest obstacle (dist obst in lines 33 and 35). Then, the cost to reach a node is
        now a sum of the path length and the new cost component for the nodes that define the trajectory.
        The latter component is weighted by a factor Cw between 0 and 1. This results in paths with larger
        safe margins with respect to obstacles, depending on the value of the weight factor.

      • Line of sight. The line of sight is limited in order to allow the algorithm to link two nodes only
        if they are not further than a given distance. Otherwise, the first modification would have no effect
        because the original Lazy-Theta* algorithm joins nodes if there is a direct line of sight between
        them, regardless of the cost. Thus, a maximum line of sight distance is included, max in line 38
        of the Algorithm 1, allowing the algorithm to link two nodes only if they are not further than this
        distance. If this distance is set to ∞ then we recover the original Lazy-Theta* algorithm. This will
        affect directly the number of expanded nodes.

These two modifications should provide paths with larger safety margins with respect to obstacles at the cost
of exploring more nodes. The quality and the computation time of these paths will depend on the weight
factor and maximum line of sight distance, so the values of these parameters in both planners should be
tuned.
1  Main()
 2    open := closed := ∅;
 3    g(sstart ) := 0;
 4    parent(sstart ):=sstart ;
 5    /* g(s) is the length of the shortest path from sstart to s */
 6    /* h(s) is the approximated distance from the goal to the vertex */
 7    open.Insert(sstart ,g(sstart ) + h(sstart ));
 8    while open 6= ∅ do
 9        s := open.Pop();
10        SetVertex(s);
11        If s = sgoal then
12             return ”path found”;
13        closed := closed ∪s;
14        foreach s0 ∈ nghbrvis (s) do
15             If s0 6∈ closed then
16                 If s0 6∈ open then
17                     g(s0 ) := ∞;
18                     parent(s0 ) := NULL;
19                 UpdateVertex(s,s0 );
20        return ”no path found”;
21 end
22 UpdateVertex(s,s’)
23    gold := g(s0 );
24    ComputeCost(s,s’);
25    If g(s0 ) < gold then
26        If s0 ∈ open then
27             open.Remove(s’);
28        open.Insert(s0 ,g(s0 ) + h(s0 ));
29 end
30 ComputeCost(s,s’)
31    /* Path 2 */
32    /* c is the cost to reach a node */
33    If g(parent(s)) + c(parent(s), s0 ) + Cw · dist obst < g(s0 ) then
34        parent(s0 ) := parent(s);
35        g(s0 ) := g(parent(s)) + c(parent(s), s0 ) + Cw · dist obst ;
36 end
37 SetVertex(s)
38    If NOT lineofsight(parent(s),s) & lineofsight(parent(s),s) < max then
39        /* Path 1 */
40        parent(s) := argmin (s0 ∈ nghbrvis ∩ closed(g(s0 ) + c(s, s0 )));
41        g(s) := min (s0 ∈ nghbrvis ∩ closed(g(s0 ) + c(s, s0 )));
42 end

                       Algorithm 1: Lazy Theta* with the introduced modifications in red.

     4.1.1   UGV planner

     The influence of the two modifications of the Lazy Theta* algorithm has been analyzed in the 2D planner
     of the UGV. Figure 7 presents how the weight factor, Cw , and line of sight, LoS, influence the trajectories
     computed by the 2D planner. Figure 7-(a) shows the number of explored nodes with different weight factors
     and maximum line of sight distances. The number of explored nodes (and thus, the computation time)
     augments as the weight factor increases for every value of the line of sight. This increase takes also place
     as the line of sight decreases. Figure 7-b shows trajectories computed with different weight factors and a
Figure 7: (a): Nodes explored depending on the weight factor and the line of sight. (b): 2D trajectories
computed for the UGV coming into the building (2D map of navigation) by considering different values of
the weight factor, Cw .

Figure 8: Influence of the line of sight and weight factor on the safety margin (top view). The distance cost
is also shown, red area around the building is the area with a higher distance cost. (a) Trajectory computed
without line of sight and the weight factor 0 (original Lazy-Theta*), (b) Trajectory computed considering
that line of sight is 2 and the weight factor 0.3. The base link frame is the initial position.

maximum line of sight distance of 1.5m. The weight factors 0.15 and 0.3 generate a safer trajectory than the
one obtained with the original algorithm (blue line). This can be appreciated when robot crosses the door.

In order to properly select the right values of Cw and LoS, we have to consider that the local planner
must generate trajectories at an approximate rate of 10Hz to ensure fast planning capabilities. Additionally,
we must choose a good compromise solution between safety and trajectory length. The chosen values are
LoS = 1.5 and Cw = 0.15. It can be seen in Fig. 7-(a) that the computation time considering Cw = 0.15
is smaller than considering Cw = 0.3, while giving similar results. Although the number of explored nodes
doubles those of the original algorithm, it still ensures the rate for fast planning capabilities.

4.1.2   UAV planner

The same analysis has been performed in the 3D planner of the UAV. Figure 8 illustrates how the safety
is fostered by showing a trajectory computed with the original Lazy Theta* algorithm and another one
Figure 9: (a) Nodes explored to compute the trajectory with lines of sight from 1.0 to 4.0 and weight factors
between 0 and 1 for each line of sight, (b) Influence of the line of sight and weight factor on the safety margin.
The trajectories considered are the computed in the scenario shown in Figure 8 with the same initial point
and goal.

considering the modified algorithm with LoS = 2 and Cw = 0.3. The trajectory length in the first one is
14m and in the second one is 15.6m. This larger trajectory makes the safety margin with respect to the
building to increase during the flight. The closest distance between the building and the path is 0.5m with
the original algorithm. However, the trajectory of the modified algorithm departs from the building (up to
5.1m away) and the minimum distance, 2.5m, takes place when the UAV reaches the goal.

Figure 9(a) shows the explored nodes with different values of the line of sight and weight factors. The
explored nodes decrease as the line of sight increases. Instead, the number of nodes fluctuates a little with
different values of the weight factor. Considering the original algorithm, LoS is not limited and Cw = 0,
the number of explored nodes is much less, 28,851. Therefore, it is noteworthy how the modified algorithm
influences the number of explored nodes.

Figure 9(b) shows the maximum distance the paths moves away from the building considering different values
of the line of sight and weight factor. In the case of the path computed with the original algorithm, this
distance is always smaller than 2.5m (see Fig. 8-a). Instead, the UAV is always at least 3.5m away as the
modified algorithm is used, and even this distance is greater than 4m as LoS < 3. The highest distances
are achieved with LoS = 1. Regarding the closest the path gets to the building, it is never shorter than
2.5m (distance between the goal and the building) as LoS < 2.5. This distance is 2.4m for LoS = 2.5 and
between 1.7m and 2.4m in the rest of cases, LoS = 3.0, 3.5, 4. Therefore, safer and smoother trajectories are
computed thanks to the modifications performed. An example is the path shown in Fig. 8-b.

Finally, we decided not to enter the building with UAVs in the trials. Although the advantages of the
modified planning algorithm have been shown and the compromise between safety and planning capabilities
can be reached, this decision guaranteed safety because the closest distance to the building would be the
distance of the inspection points to the facade. For this reason, in the competition we did not limit the line
of sight neither consider the distance cost, Cw = 0, in the 3D planner. This allowed us to maintain the fast
planning capabilities of the 3D planner.

4.2   Path tracker

The Path Tracker module computes the velocity commands to navigate and follow the trajectory computed
by the Local Planner in both platforms. The UGV makes use of a pure pursuit (PP) (Kelly, 1994; Park et al.,
            Figure 10: (a) Basic control scheme of the path tracker implemented on the UAVs.

2014) controller that adapts the angular velocity of the robot to reach the closest point into the commanded
trajectory. The main idea of PP is to calculate a real-time target waypoint (WP) which lays in the target
path and is situated at a look-ahead (L) distance from the vehicle. When applied to non-holonomic robots,
PP generates a commanded heading change ∆θ = arctg(y/x) that is necessary to make the robot point
towards WP, where x and y are the coordinates of WP in the reference frame of the robot.

On the other hand, the UAVs make use of the command velocity interface provided by the DJI software.
This interface allows commanding linear velocities in X, Y and Z axes, and angular rates in yaw. A saturated
proportional controller (see Fig. 10) has been implemented to follow the commanded local trajectory in the
UAVs. This control scheme gives us a trapezoidal velocity profile in each axis in order to reach the current
destination waypoint while ensuring convergence to the final destination as we have a first order system.

4.3   Experiments

Figure 11 presents the trajectory followed by the M210 UAV in one experiment, in red, alongside with the
global planned trajectory in green. As we use a local planner in order to check for unmodeled obstacles on
the environment, the tracking of the trajectory on the horizontal plane is not perfect and it tends to take
shortcuts on the corners whenever possible. On the other hand, the system follows the altitude reference
more closely.

The 3D planner obtained a remarkable performance that allowed us to perform all experiments during the
MBZIRC competition without any collisions. The computation times of the global plan is of less than a
second in its onboard NUC7i7 and using a single core. On the other hand, the local planner computes
trajectories at 7Hz approximately which ensures fast planning capabilities of the 3D local planner.

5     Fire perception and extinguishing

Our approach for the fire extinguishing task in the MBZIRC - Challenge 3 consists of two modules: the
perception module detects fires and estimates their positions with a thermal camera; and an extinguishing
module that attacks the fire by dropping a blanket or ejecting water.

5.1   Fire perception

The module of fire perception detects fires within the scene using as input the data from a thermal camera.
As output, it indicates if a fire has been detected, as well as its 2D coordinates on the image plane and 3D
coordinates in the scenario.
Figure 11: Top view (a) and 3D view (b) of the global planned trajectory (green line) and its associated
executed trajectory, as estimated by our localization system (red line) during a flight of the DJI Matrice
M210 in the second trial for Challenge 3.

All fires in the competition were simulated using a thermal heated plate that reached temperatures up to
110º. The fires on the facades featured additionally a real fire using gas, while the remaining fires were also
visually simulated by using a flame simulator using a red silk.

In our solution, we aimed for a fully infrared-based detection of the heat source. The main sensor related to
fire perception is the miniature infrared thermal camera from Seek Thermal mentioned above. The camera
can detect temperatures between -40º to 330º Celsius. We forked a ROS driver from ETHZ and made
additional modifications10 . The driver provides a grayscale temperature image, as well as a radiometric
map.

Fire detection is carried out by analyzing the images provided by the infrared cameras. A calibration
procedure transforms the raw radiometric data obtained by the cameras to temperature ranges. While
obtaining absolute temperature values from radiometry is a very complex process, dependant on the material
emissivity (for instance, a metal can radiate less IR energy for the same temperature than other materials
with larger emissivity), atmospheric attenuation, and many other factors, here we are more interested on clear
relative temperature differences, which simplifies the calibration procedure. The calibration is performed for
the different kind of fires once. Then, given the clear difference of temperatures between the fire and the
surroundings, a thresholding operation is performed to segment the fire pixels. As a result, the fire detection
module provides coordinates on the image plane of fire spots. Figure 12 shows detection results obtained
during the competition. During the competition, no false positives were generated by using the method.

5.2   Fire position estimation

The fire segmentation results are used for the visual servoing final approach to extinguish the fire (see Section
5.3). However, during the exploration of the scenario we need to estimate the 3D position of the fire spots
to plan the approximation goals for fire extinguishing.

From the fire position in pixel coordinates it is not possible to the estimate the 3D position of the fires, as
there is no information about the range to the fires. In order to obtain the range, the LIDAR information is
considered. The LIDAR values are mapped to the image coordinates given the known static transformation
between sensors and camera internal calibration. This way they can be associated to the fire object, so that
a range can be estimated. This is not always possible given the resolution of the LIDAR (and depending
 10 https://github.com/robotics-upo/seekthermal_ros
Figure 12: (a) Simulated ground fire, colored temperature image and segmentation using the radiometric
values (the circle shows the mean position of the fire). (b) Simulated facade fire, colored temperature image
and segmentation using the radiometric values. The original temperature image gets saturated, while working
with the radiometric field allows for a detailed segmentation.

on the actual distance to the fire). If not range information is available, the range is estimated considering
the maximum distances according to the 3D map of the environment. For the fires located on the floor, the
height of the UAV is considered to estimate the position of the fire.

Each 3D measurement is associated with a covariance matrix that reflects the uncertainty on the range, which
is adapted according to the estimated range (when no range is available, a large uncertainty is associated
to it), and other aspects like the position of the robot. Then, an Information Filter is used to fuse in time
the measurements about the position of the fire from different view points in order to triangulate the fire
position, as in our previous work (Dias et al., 2015).

5.3     Fire extinguishing

This module is in charge of confirming the fire presence, aiming adequately the extinguisher system, and
releasing the water or the blanket. The module assumes that the robot is already located at an attacking
distance to the fire. Three tasks should be accomplished separately in each robot: confirming, centering and
extinguishing.

5.3.1    Fire extinguishing with UGV using water

The confirming phase is done by scanning with the Pan&Tilt unit onboard the UGV to look for the precise
position of the fire. To this end, we command a predefined trajectory to the pan and tilt unit using position
commands. At this point, the Fire Detection module is activated.

Whenever the Fire Detection module confirms a fire, the centering phase use a velocity visual servoing
proportional controller to command the Pan&Tilt unit joints. The error signal is the pixel difference between
the detected fire position on the image plane and the center of the locked-on target zone. We have empirically
defined this zone in such a way that the water ejecting mechanism hits on target. This zone is indicated in
an area of the image and it depends on both the height and distance to the target.

Once the extinguisher has locked on the fire, the extinguishing phase begins, and the system ejects water.
As a final note, it is difficult to perceive the trajectory of the water with the onboard sensors. Thus, to
increase the chances of successfully hitting the target, the pan&tilt unit performs a cross-shaped movement
while ejecting water during 60 seconds.
Figure 13: Facade fire extinction with an UAV using water. (a) The thermal camera is used to detect the fire.
The 3D position of the fire is estimated by using the LIDAR information and tracked using an Information
Filter. (b) Visual servoing for extinguishing. Top: commanded UAV speeds generated by the control system
on y (horizontal UAV body axis, parallel to the wall, blue) and z (vertical UAV body axis, red). Bottom: u
(columns, green) and v (rows, orange) image coordinates of the centroid of the fire detected on the image.
The u and v target coordinates are plotted in pink and light green, respectively.

5.3.2   Fire extinguishing with UAV using water

To extinguish the fires on the facade, once the UAV is positioned in the attack position, the UAV first
performs a manoeuvre to confirm that there is a fire in the area (to compensate for imprecision on reaching
the fire attacking waypoint or on the estimated 3D fire position). This manoeuvre consists of performing a
square motion parallel to the facade of the building.

As soon as a fire is detected the square sequence stops. We use a proportional velocity controller in the local
Y and Z axes of the UAV so that the detected position of the fire on the image plane enters into the locked
on target zone. As in the UGV case, we have empirically defined the locked on target area on the image
assuming a distance of attack to the fire. Once the fire is on the locked on target zone, the water ejecting
starts. As the UAV can be subjected to disturbances while flying which may cause the UAV move outside
the lockup zone, the velocity controller keeps regulating the position during the ejection.

Figure 13 presents an example from the competition (during the Grand Challenge). It shows the output of
our control system as a function of the coordinates of the centroid of the detected fire region on the thermal
image. This control system sends velocity commands to the M600 autopilot in order to center the fire in
the image. This particular fire was subjected to lateral wind gust of up to 8 m/s. It can be seen in Fig. 13
how this provoked oscillations in the control in the lateral velocity, making it difficult to adequately point
the water hose. The fire was never completely lost during the water ejection and the fire was considered
partially extinguished.

For the fires inside the building, as before, first the drone starts a fire confirmation sequence. In this case, to
prioritize the safety of the platform, the maneuver consists only of yaw rotations in place. If a heat trace is
found, then a proportional velocity controller in yaw is executed to center the fire horizontally on the image
plane. When this is achieved the water ejecting starts, keeping the controller for correcting disturbances.
                                Robot j
                        Robot i                                              ExecuteTree

                                                                                  BT Mission
                                                                                  Execution

                                                GoToGoal    TakeOff   Land      FireDetection3D                      FireExtinguish       Central Station
                                                                                                       Fire Image
                                     Odom +                                           Fire             Coordinates        Fire
                  Map                                       Navigation
                                   Localization                                     Detection                        Extinguishing
                  Velocity Estimates            6DoF Pose                                                   LIDAR             Velocity
                                GPS                                                                                           Commands
                                        LIDAR               Velocity Commands    LIDAR            IR                                     actionlib server interface

                                                                      Robot ROS Driver                                                   actionlib client calls

                                                                                                                                         topics

Figure 14: A depiction of the architecture. Each robot has operational autonomy to execute missions, and
all processing takes place onboard, where all the enclosed modules enclosed run. A central Control Station
can order the robots to execute missions through the BT Mission Execution node.

5.3.3    Fire extinguishing with UAV using blankets

In this case the UAV performs a confirming fire manoeuvre similar to the one done for facade wall fires,
but this time the UAV moves in a plane parallel to the ground. As the blanket must cover the fire, the
extinguishing action is more convoluted. Once the fire is confirmed on the image, the UAV is placed just
above the fire. Then the drone descends to be more accurate when dropping the blanket. Afterwards, the
UAV moves backwards until the fire is out of image and stop. Just in that moment, two electromagnets from
the extinguishing system switch off to unroll the blanket. From there, the UAV moves forward passing throw
the fire, and so detecting the fire again with the thermal camera. The UAV will continue this movement,
over passing the fire, and just when the thermal camera stop detecting the fire, the last four magnets will
switch off and so the blanket drops covering the fire. From there, a fast move upward is performed in order
to avoid any collision with the deployed blankets.

6       Mission Executive and Multi-Robot Coordination

6.1     System architecture and atomic tasks

All former components need to be integrated and work jointly to achieve the missions of the Challenge. This
integration relies on the ROS framework, using the ros-kinetic distribution under Ubuntu 16.04. The
algorithms described above have been implemented as ROS nodes.

The basic architecture of the system is shown in Fig. 14. Continuous data flows between nodes are im-
plemented through ROS topics. Some of these nodes also provide atomic tasks that will be composed
to create the whole missions. As abstraction for such tasks, we employ the ROS’ actionlib package11 ,
which offers a simple interface to preemptable tasks. In particular, we use the task model offered by the
SimpleActionServer implementation (actions can be ACTIVE when running; SUCCEEDED when successfully
finished; CANCELED if they cannot be processed; ABORTED if they cannot be completed; finally, actions can
be also PREEMPTED by the client). The list of atomic tasks considered by each robot are shown in Table 6.2.
These tasks are the same for all robots, but of course they have specialized implementations depending on
 11 http://wiki.ros.org/actionlib
 actionlib                Params        Final Status                                         Result
 TakeOff                  Height        CANCELLED if vehicle not ready                       None
                                        SUCCEEDED if height reached
                                        ABORTED if height cannot be reached after takeoff
 Land                      None         CANCELLED if vehicle already landed                  None
                                        SUCCEEDED landed
                                        ABORTED if the UAV cannot land
 GoToGoal            Waypoint (WP)      CANCELLED if no path to WP                           None
 (Section 4)                            SUCCEEDED if WP reached
                                        ABORTED if WP cannot be reached
 FireDetection3D         Duration       SUCCEEDED if fire found within the given duration    3D position
 (Section 5.1)                          ABORTED if fire not found                            of fire
 FireExtinguish            None         SUCCEEDED if fire can be locked on                   None
 (Section 5.3)                          ABORTED if fire cannot be locked on

Table 2: Atomic tasks that can be carried out by each robot. Actionlib interface, parameters required,
potential final status, and final result reported.

the robot (for instance, TakeOff is not applicable to the UGV, and the FireExtinguish action has the three
variants described in Section 5.3).

6.2   Mission definition and execution

Given the atomic tasks that can be carried out by the modules described in the former sections, we need
a framework to define whole missions as plans that combine those tasks, and a mechanism to execute and
supervise the defined task plans. This mechanism is the mission executive, which is a fundamental component
to allow the robots to have operational autonomy (Gancet and Lacroix, 2007; Molina et al., 2020). A popular
example of executive is the ROS SMACH system (Bohren and Cousins, 2010), which uses nested Finite State
Machines (FSM) to represent and execute high-level plans.

In our case, we employ Behaviour Trees (BTs) (Colledanchise and Ogren, 2017) as the framework for mission
definition and execution for the robots of the team. They are an alternative to FSMs that offer advantages in
terms of modularity and reactivity. First originated as a tool for Non-Player Character (NPC) AI develop-
ment in the video game industry, BTs are becoming widespread in robotics, mainly due to its modularity and
simplicity (Colledanchise and Ogren, 2017; Paxton et al., 2017; Colledanchise and Ögren, 2018), including
their use to define behaviours for UAVs (Ogren, 2012; Molina et al., 2020).

While a full description of the BT framework is out of the scope of this paper, here we summarize its main
elements. BT model behaviors as hierarchical trees made up of nodes (an example can be seen in Fig.
16). Trees are traversed from top to bottom at a given tick rate following a set of well-defined rules and
executing the tasks/commands associated to the nodes that are encountered while doing so. Nodes’ statuses
are reported back up in the chain and the flow changes accordingly. A status can be either SUCCESS, FAILURE
or RUNNING. According to their functionality, nodes can be classified as:

      • Composite: it controls the flow through the tree itself and are similar to control structures in
        structured programming languages.

      • Decorator: it processes or modifies the status it receives from its child.

      • Leaf : this is where the actual task is performed, the atomic tasks that the robot can carry out, or
        other functionalities. As such, these nodes cannot have any children.
As it can be seen from the classification above, BT decouple logic from actual tasks in a natural way. When
developing a tree, one only should care about the leaf nodes. In this case, these leaves correspond to the
actionlib tasks described just above and another potential operations. The flow can later be defined and
re-arranged constantly, creating new behaviors and expanding on what is already done. This modularity and
composability (due to the hierarchical nature of the trees) of BTs with respect to alternatives like FSM is one
of the advantages of the formulation (Colledanchise and Ögren, 2018), and was very relevant for defining the
missions in the fleet and adapting to the lessons learned during the rehearsals. Missions could be re-defined
very fast, and behaviours could be developed in parallel and easily integrated as sub-trees in more complex
missions once well tested and validated.

The behavior of the individual robots of the team in the Challenge are designed using BTs. The mission
executive that carries out and monitors the mission defined as a BT uses a BT engine. We have employed
a publicly available BT implementation12 . We have developed a ROS plugin for this engine. It ships with
a library containing ROS subscribers, publishers, services and actionlib leaf nodes (mapping adequately
the states of these actions to the corresponding states for the nodes BT) to be able to send and receive
messages, and call services/actions to/from other nodes running in the network. And it includes a BT
Mission Execution ROS node that offers an additional interface (as an actionlib as well) to load, start
and stop user-defined behavior trees. This node (see Fig. 14) runs onboard each robot, providing them with
full operational autonomy to carry out complete missions.

6.3   Cooperation and Coordination

The approach to Challenge 3 takes advantage of the use of a heterogeneous robot team (mixing UGV and
different types of UAVs). On the one hand, each robot specializes on one of the tasks for the Challenge. This
means that we consider a loose cooperation between the robots. In particular, we devote the ground robot
for the ground floor indoor fire, and each UAV to a different facade (with the larger M600 for the outside
fires and the facade closest to the outside fires).

The Control Station module (see Fig. 14) commands the different robots to execute out their missions,
and those are carried out autonomously by each robot. Each robot runs all modules onboard, including a
different ROS master node. We use the software described in (Tardioli et al., 2019) to share between robots
only vital information through the wireless network, including the position of each robot and the interfaces
to control the robots from the station.

Thus, the main aspect to consider is the coordination in time and space to avoid collisions. The task
allocation mitigates the risks, as the different vehicles will operate in different facades and, thus, different
spaces. In any case, it is important to avoid close encounters between the vehicles. The takeoff zone is very
narrow, so the Control Station regulates the order of initiating the missions for each vehicle so that no two
UAVs take off at the same time. Furthermore, each vehicle has a landing zone that is separated from the
rest of the team.

7     Experiments and Results

This section presents the results obtained during the 2020 competition the MBZIRC at the National Exhi-
bition Center in Abu Dhabi, (UAE) (see Figure 1). In this section, we focus on the results obtained by the
integrated system as a whole, describing a high-level summary of the actions performed by each platform in
each event of the competition. For a detail on the performance of the individual systems, please refer to the
previous sections.

The whole integrated multi-robot system was applied 3 times to Challenge 3 during the final event in Abu
 12 https://www.behaviortree.dev
Figure 15: (a) Trajectories of the 2 robots employed in Trial 1. The M600 UAV and the UGV SIAR
trajectories are depicted in green and magenta, respectively. The labels indicate the timestamps when the
main events occurred. (b) Task performed by each robot with the corresponding timestamp.

Dhabi. Twice for the Challenge 3 competition proper (the highest score of both trials was kept as the
final score), and once more for the Grand Challenge triathlon (please refer to Section 7.3). The results
obtained in the competition are presented in Table 3. We scored in all trials, always in autonomous mode,
and we managed to hit on targets on facade fires and both indoor and outdoor fires. We also managed to
autonomously operate a team of 3 robots at the same time. With these results, we achieved the seventh place
in Challenge 3 (out of 20 teams in the competition) and the fifth place in the Challenge 3 entry to the Grand
Challenge (out of 17) in our first participation in the competition (contributing this way to an overall third
place in the Grand Challenge for the team). The results reflect the complexity of the challenge. A video
highlighting results from the MBZIRC competition can be accessed at https://youtu.be/sx9R-6JrfQA.

Table 3: Results obtained during the MBZIRC 2020 competition. All tasks were achieved in autonomous
mode. Maximum score for a task is by putting 1 litre or covering 100% of fire.
             Outdoor Fires with blan- Facade Fires with UAVs Indoor Fires (Weights: 24 Score
             ket (Weights: 10 UAV, 5 (Weights: 14 ground floor, second floor, 16 first floor,
             UGV)                       8 first and second floor)    10 ground floor)
 TRIAL 1 1 fire, UAV. 50% covered       None                         None                      5
 TRIAL 2 None                           None                         Ground floor, UGV. 350 ml 3.5
 GRAND N/A                              Ground floor fire, under Ground floor, UGV. 3 ml       0.13
                                        wind, UAV. 8 ml

7.1   Trial 1

In this trial the ground robot SIAR was tasked to look for and to extinguish the fire in the ground floor
inside the building, while the M600 was tasked to extinguish one outdoor floor with the blanket and then
one facade fire with water. We had technical issues that prevented us from flying with the M210 platform.
In contrast, our M600 platform did perform very well. It was able to successfully deploy a blanket which
partially covered an outdoor fire. Figure 15 shows the timeline of the most important events that took place
during the first trial.

The mission definition for the M600 robot as a BT is presented in Fig. 16. The UAV takes off (UPOTakeOff
block) after a timeout (to wait for the ground robot to be at a safe distance; t1 in Fig. 15). Then, the
Figure 16: (a) General tree of a (simplified) BT for the M600 mission. The robot is tasked to put out an out-
side fire and then a fire on the left the facade of the building. The Sequence composite node executes the leafs
from top to bottom. If a node returns FAILURE, the whole mission fails. Leaf nodes FireOutsideMission,
LeftFacadeMission and GotoAndLand are sub-trees. (b) FireOutsideMission sub-tree.

Figure 17: Data from one blanket deployment task of M600 UAV. (a) An exploration path is given and the
methods of Section 5.1 are used to detect and to estimate the 3D position of the fire. Then, the blanket
deployment manoeuvre is carried out. (b) Exploration phase. (c) Blanket deployment phase.

fire blanket extinguishing mission proceeds, represented by the FireOutsideMission sub-tree. Figure 16
(b), shows the elements of this sub-tree. First, the Parallel composite node executes in parallel a path
to explore (OutsideExplorationPath, which uses the navigation actions of Section 4) and activates the
UPOFireDetection3D action of Section 5.1. Once one of the two nodes returns SUCCESS (either because
a fire is detected or the exploration path is finished), the Parallel composite returns SUCCESS (FAILURE
otherwise).

In this case, the exploration path is followed until t3 in Fig. 15. The leaf node CheckBool returns SUCCESS
as the variable fd found is TRUE. This means that a fire has been detected by the module, and its esti-
mated coordinates are stored at (fd x, fd y, fd z). Then, the UAV is commanded to a fire attack point 3
Figure 18: (a) Trajectories of the 3 robots employed in Trial 2. The M600 UAV was tasked with extinguishing
an outdoor fire (green trajectory). The M210 UAV was commanded to extinguish a fire in the opposite facade
of the building (black trajectory). The UGV SIAR was commanded to look and extinguish the indoor fire
in the ground floor (red trajectory). (b) Task performed by each robot with the corresponding timestamp.

meters over the estimated position (computed using the MathOperationFloat leaf), by calling to the corre-
sponding UPOGoToGoal (Section 4). Once there, the extinguishing procedure with the blanket is activated
(UPOFireExtinguish, Section 5.3.3). The blanket is successfully deployed at time t4, covering 50% of the
fire. Figure 17 depicts the main steps of the fire blanket mission for the M600 UAV, as described in Fig. 16.

After the blanket mission, and regardless of its outcome (through the ForceSuccess decorator), the M600
proceeds to the facade fire extinguishing sub-mission. This sub-mission (LeftFacadeMission) is very similar
to the FireOutsideMission described above (see Fig. 16, b)), with different parameters. The main difference
is that the exploration path is composed by a set of waypoints that cover the facade, with the UAV oriented
towards it. The second difference is that the frontal IR camera is used, and, when a fire is detected, an fire
attack waypoint is generated 2.5 meters in front of it. Finally, the UPOFireExtinguish task is called with
the specialized version of Section 5.3.2.

In normal conditions, after the exploration and regardless of the result of the facade mission (through the
second ForceSuccess), the robot will go back to the home position. In this case, however, the mission was
interrupted at t6, when we asked for a reset to replace the deployed blanket and to start the UGV, instead
of waiting for the full exploration of the facade.

After the reset (at t7), the M600 is tasked the same mission with a different exploration path to find the
second fire outside, but the blanket was released accidentally just after take off, as the magnetic gripper
failed, so a second reset was asked. The UGV SIAR proceeds to its mission (described in detail in Trial 2),
but it can only explore one point inside the building (t11) before the trial time runs out.

7.2   Trial 2

In Trial 2, we included the second UAV, M210, that could not participate in Trial 1. As before, the ground
robot was tasked to look for and extinguish the fire in the ground floor, and the M600 was tasked to extinguish
one outdoor fire with the blanket and one facade fire with water. The M210 was tasked to attack a fire in a
different facade of the building. Figure 18 shows the general evolution of Trial 2.
Figure 19: a) General tree of a (simplified) BT for the SIAR mission to put out one fire on the ground floor
of the building. b) Subtree Floor0SurveyandExtinguish. c) Subtree CheckFireandExtinguish.

Figure 20: Fire extinguishing action performed by the UGV in Trial 2. (a) Snapshot of the video recorded
by the organization in the extinguishing action. The amount of water poured in can be seen below. (b-up)
Internal state of the SIAR and FOV of the thermal camera. (b-bottom) Detected fire on the IR image. (c)
The upper plot represents the pan and tilt velocity commands on blue and red lines, respectively. In the
bottom plot, the image coordinates are plotted in light green and orange, respectively.

At the beginning of this trial M600 and SIAR initiated their missions. However, after taking off again
the M600 accidentaly dropped its blanket due to a magnet malfunction. A reset was called and then
the UGV SIAR was able to carry out its mission successfully. Figure 19 presents the mission of SIAR.
First, the UGV is commanded to enter the building, which occurs at timestamp t2 in Fig. 18. Then, the
Floor0SurveyAndExtinguish submission is activated. It consists of inspecting two different points using
the CheckFireAndExtinguish sub-tree (see Fig. 19, b and c). When a inspection point is reached, the
Figure 21: (a) Trajectories of the M600 (green and yellow) and SIAR (purple and black) in their first and
second missions, respectively. (b) Task performed for each robot with the corresponding timestamp.

block UPOFireExtinguish is called. The onboard infrared thermal camera checks if a fire exists using the
procedure of Section 5.3.1. If no fire is present, the module returns FAILURE (this occurs, correctly, as there is
no fire, in the first inspection point between times t5 and t6). Otherwise, first a centering action is performed
and finally the fire extinguishing system is activated to deploy 1 litre (see Fig. 20, a). This actually occurs
in the second inspection point (between times t9 and t10). Figure 20 shows the UGV extinguishing this
indoor fire during Trial 2. We are able to apply 350 ml on target from the whole liter, because of a small
misalignment of the water ejector and the thermal camera. The mission is not designed to deploy all the
water on the UGV, allowing it to repeat exploring the environment for more fires, to compensate for potential
false alarms. This turned out to be too conservative, as the system was actually capable of detecting the
real fire present and no false alarms were created.

After the UGV put out the inside fire, a new reset is called (in time t11) to initiate the UAVs. The M210
takes off first at t12 and is sent to explore the farthest facade. 20 seconds later, at t13, the M600 takes
off. The M600 is tasked the same mission as in Trial 1, with a change in the order of the exploration path
waypoints to add a safety buffer with the M210 UAV. In this case, the outdoor fire is again correctly detected
and located, and the blanket is deployed (at t18), but misses the target by a few centimeters. We actually
increased the height at which the deployment manoeuvre was performed from Trial 1 to 2 to add some safety
buffer, and this ends up being detrimental. There is not further time to carry the facade part of the M600
mission.

The M210 is able to explore part of the facade looking for the fires (t16 until t21). However, we run out
of time during Trial 2 before it can detect any fire. Please notice that this mission is the same as the
M600 facade sub-mission described above, changing the exploration path waypoints. This shows one of the
main advantages of using BTs: its modularity allows us to reuse BTs from different platforms with minimal
changes.

7.3   Grand Challenge

In the Grand Challenge, a reduced version of the three MBZIRC Challenges are carried out at the same
time. Regarding Challenge 3, the fires to put out with a blanket are eliminated. There is also a limit in the
number of robots for tackling all challenges, and thus we could only use our M600 platform and the UGV.
The total amount of time was raised from 15 to 25 minutes, but resets are global to all challenges.
Figure 21 shows the main events that occurred during the Challenge 3 entry to the Grand Challenge. The
mission for the M600 drone is a stripped down version of the mission in Trials 1 and 2, eliminating the
blanket deployment (again, this was very easily carried out given the composition of the associated BT). In
contrast to the experiments in Trial 2, in this case our M600 drone manages to partially extinguish a facade
fire. After a first reset at t4 (due to other Challenge), it follows an exploratory path until it detects an active
fire with its thermal camera on front at t8. As soon as it detects the fire, it switches into fire centering mode
and starts to eject water to extinguish it (see Fig. 13). This particular fire is given larger weights for the
scoring system as it was subjected to lateral wind gusts of up to 8 m/s.

Regarding the UGV platform, the mission is the same as before, with the main change of deploying the
whole tank of water and returning to home position instead of searching for the remaining fires. It does
not perform as well as in the previous day as the navigation system gets stuck when trying to enter in the
building at timestamp t7. Since requesting a reset affects and stops every challenge, it is necessary to wait
for the opportune moment and coordinate the whole team to intervene the platform and restart its system.

Later, at time t12 we reinitialize the UGV and thus finally the second mission is successfully carried out.
The UGV heads to the first inspection point, and then it executes the searching phase (Section 5.1) looking
for fire at time t14. As soon as it detects the fire (located at a different point than the previous day), the
centering action is executed (t15) and the UGV is able to partially extinguish the fire on the ground floor.
Unfortunately, the time expires only a few seconds after the start of the extinguishing procedure (t16), and
thus only a small quantity of water is deployed on target.

8    Conclusions and Lessons Learnt

We present in this article our entry to tackle MBZIRC Challenge 3: “Team of Robots to FightFire in High
Rise Building”, using cooperative multi-robot team framework approach. The system presented achieved
the 7th place (same score as 6th, longer mission time) in Challenge 3 and contributed to the 3rd place in the
Grand Challenge of the team. The difficulty of this Challenge can be seen in that only 9 teams were able to
score in autonomous mode between the two trials of Challenge 3, and only 5 teams during the Grand Finale
trial of the same Challenge 3. We managed to score in autonomous mode in all three occasions.

And while the system and techniques presented in the paper were developed with the MBZIRC challenge
in mind, we believe the localization, navigation and mission executive can be adapted and applied to other
urban scenarios.

At the same time, the system was not able to perform as robustly as expected and evidently some other
teams did better. Some of the lessons learned are presented here:

Hardware matters: Being a robotics competition means that not only software matters, but hardware
selection and design decisions are key. The use of off-the-shelf platforms was a good decision, in particular
for the drones. The DJI platforms offered a ready to fly system with direct ROS integration. This opened
the door to focus on the software development tools required for the robot autonomy, significantly reducing
the issues and problems derived from hardware integration in drones. It is also worth to mention that we
experimented DJI software issues before and during the competition: onboard firmware mismatch problems,
random GPS no-fly area restrictions and motor overheating. Nevertheless, all in all, we consider that the
advantages of using a commercial off-the-shelf drone platform was a good decision and that, in general, is
preferable to avoid the design/implementation of drones in order to focus in the autonomy problem. The
platforms were adapted for the water ejection and blanket deployment systems. The results could have been
improved by more robust hardwar adaptation. While all in all the water ejection mechanisms were adequate,
achieving a higher pressure would have helped in being more accurate. Regarding the blanket deployment
mechanism, while we were able to deploy the blanket on the fire once, it was affected by the air turbulence
generated by the own UAV which led to some blanket drops, as described above. Finally, our ground robot
used a pan and tilt unit instead of an arm like most teams for budgetary and weight restrictions. The use
of an arm clearly helps in the final extinguishing manoeuvre.

Versatile localization: Using a map-based localization system allowed us a lot of versatility, even per-
mitting us finally discarding the use of GPS for localization. This approach allowed us for fast system
deployment, so that we do not need a precise GPS localization to localize the robot into the map, just the
minimum required by the DJI drones to perform the take-off maneuver safely. The localization had a stable
performance and a good precision during the competition, relying only on the use of LIDAR measures that
were matched against a 3D map obtained a priori. It also was very important in order to be able to safely
navigate in the scenario, as the localization of our platforms was performed taking into account the different
elements on the stage, e.g. columns or safety nets, allowing us to locate them with good precision against the
obstacles in the environment. The localization supported the robot autonomous navigation in the scenario,
and the map-based system made the indoor-outdoor transition on localization seamless. However, only the
ground robot entered the building. Even though we performed missions with the drones inside the building
in simulation, finally we did not attempt to enter the building during the competition. This was one of the
most challenging tasks and, actually, no team was able to score inside the building during the competition,
and only some manual trials were performed. This clearly requires techniques with a higher level of maturity.

Local operational autonomy: Robot local autonomy was also key. Each robot was able to carry out its
mission with all processing carried out on board, with the central station only in charge of launching the local
missions of the robots in adequate order and relaying some global information. Even under communication
dropouts, the robots were able to carry out their missions. The use of BTs as a mission executive on board
the robots offered us also a great deal of flexibility to design and compose the missions on the base of the
atomic tasks and sub-behaviours already defined. The BT engine also allowed the robots to react to the
events detected during the runs.

Rapid and robust deployment: At the same time, robustness is fundamental to operate several robots
at the same time. During trials, preparation time was very short. While we were able to perform missions
with 3 robots at the same time, the system start-up was not robust enough to fully leverage the 15 minutes
of the missions. While the system can operate under communication dropouts, communication with the
robots was needed to start them and, some times, delays in the starting sequence caused by communication
problems prevented to achieve more tasks in the mission. However, we feel that we are in the right direction
and we look forward to subsequent editions to improve the robustness and accuracy of our systems and to,
hopefully, win the challenge!

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities (COMCISE
RTI2018-100847-B-C22, MCIU/AEI/FEDER, UE) and the Khalifa University under contract no. 2020-
MBZIRC-10. The work of S. Martinez-Rozas is partially supported by the Antofagasta University.

UPO would like to acknowledge Paulo Alvito and the IDMind13 company for the support with the ground
robot hardware, Marcel Richter and the AeroGuillena airfield for the support during the tests, and Danilo
Tardioli, from the University of Zaragoza, Spain, for his multi-master ROS software for multi-robot teams.